Named   Entity Recognition  and  Normalization  Applied  to Large Scale Information  Extraction from  the Materials Science  Literature         
                               
ABSTRACT:
The number of published materials science
articles has increased manyfold over the past few decades.
Now, a major bottleneck in the materials discovery pipeline arises
in connecting new results with the previously established
literature. A potential solution to this problem is to map the
unstructured raw text of published articles onto structured
database entries that allow for programmatic querying. To this
end, we apply text mining with named entity recognition (NER)
for large-scale information extraction from the published
materials science literature. The NER model is trained to extract
summary-level information from materials science documents,
including inorganic material mentions, sample descriptors, phase
labels, material properties and applications, as well as any synthesis and characterization methods used. Our classifier achieves
an accuracy (f1) of 87%, and is applied to information extraction from 3.27 million materials science abstracts. We extract more
than 80 million materials-science-related named entities, and the content of each abstract is represented as a database entry in a
structured format. We demonstrate that simple database queries can be used to answer complex “meta-questions” of the
published literature that would have previously required laborious, manual literature searches to answer. All of our data and
functionality has been made freely available on our Github (https://github.com/materialsintelligence/matscholar) and website
(http://matscholar.com), and we expect these results to accelerate the pace of future materials science discovery.


Supporting information for:  Named Entity Recognition and Normalization Applied to Large-Scale  Information Extraction from the Materials Science Literature       
                                                   
S.4: Named entity annotation                                          

            1. Material (MAT): Any inorganic solid or alloy, any non-gaseous element (at RT),  e.g., “BaTiO3”, “titania”, “Fe”.                                      
                                                                                    
            2. Symmetry/phase label (SPL): Names for crystal structures/phases, e.g., “tetragonal”,‘fcc”,“rutile”,“perovskite”; or,anysymmetrylabelsuchas“Pbnm”,or“Pnma”.                                                                        
                                                                                    
            3. Sample descriptor (DSC): Special descriptions of the type/shape of the sample. Examples inlcude “single crystal”, “nanotube”, “quantum dot”.         
                                        
            4. Property (PRO): Anything measurable that can have a unit and a value, e.g., “conductivity”, “band gap”; or, any qualitative property or phenomenon exhibited by a material, e.g., “ferroelectric”, “metallic”.                          
                                                                                    
            5. Application (APL): Any high-level application such as “photovoltaics”, or any specific device such as “field-effect transistor”.                                                                                             
                                                                                    
            6. Synthesis method (SMT): Any technique for synthesising a material, e.g., “pulsed laser deposition”, “solid state reaction”, or any other step in sample production such   as “annealing” or “etching”.                                          
                                                                                                                                                          
            7. Characterization method (CMT): Any method used to characterize a material, experiment or theory: e.g., “photoluminescence”, “XRD”, ‘tight binding”, “DFT”. It  can also be a name for an equation or model. such “Bethe-Salpeter equation”.

