The SOFC-Exp Corpus and Neural Approaches to Information Extraction in the Materials Science Domain

1 EXPERIMENT MENTIONS
As a first step, we identify sentences that describe a relevant solid oxide fuel cell experiment. Such sentences
should explicitly mention at least one of the following elements:
· The material composition of the fuel cell
· The condition of operation of the fuel cell
· The type of fuel cell
· A chemico-physical property of the whole fuel cell
Among other things, we do not mark descriptions of processes, experiments unrelated to fuel cells, characterization
techniques, synthesis procedures, explanations or evaluations. In this annotation pass, we do not mark material
structure or any general material properties either.
Usually, but not necessarily, an experiment is introduced to the text by a frame-evoking verb such as test, evaluate,
measure, or generate. Depending on the context, the same verb may occur as frame-evoking element or not.
We annotate the words that introduce the experiments involving fuel cells with one of these labels:
· current_experiment: when original and novel content is introduced.
· previous_work: when the sentence focuses on specific previous work described in detail in other sources.
· general_info: when the state of the art of fuel cells is described, e.g., general knowledge that one could find in a
textbook or in a survey.
· future_work: when the authors suggest further research topics.

Examples
Note: For the sake of clarity, the examples in these guidelines are only partially annotated. In each section, they
display exclusively the frame participants and relations that are being discussed.
· Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are based [general_info] on a ceramic electrolyte and work at elevated temperature
between 600 and 1000 °C. [PMC4021905]
· In this report, we demonstrate [current_experiment] a prototypical, AAO-supported thin-film fuel cell with a
bilayered electrolyte comprising a GDC film and a thin protective YSZ layer. [PMC3564701]
· Shim et al. demonstrated [previous_work] that a fuel cell employing a 40-nm-thick yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ)
can generate a power density of 270 mW/cm2 at 350°C [11], while Kerman et al. demonstrated [previous_work]
1,037 mW/cm2 at 500°C from a 100-nm-thick YSZ-based fuel cell [12]. [PMC3564701]
· Further optimization of BEC thickness may enhance the cell performance, which could lead [future_work] to
wider potential applications of AAO supporting TF-SOFCs as high-efficiency power sources. [PMC4578433]
· Citric acid (99+%, Alfa Aesar), in a 2:1 molar ratio to the metal ions in the final product, was added and heated till
a solution was formed. [synthesis route: no annotations here] [PMC5075869]
· In general, a scan rate of 2Hz and a resolution of 512×512 pixels over a scan area of 1×1 µm2 2were chosen.
[characterization technique: no annotations here] [PMC6158676]
· X-ray diffraction of SrFe0
· 9−xCuxNb0
· 1O3−δ (x = 0–0.4) showed that it exhibited a single phase cubic perovskite
structure (SG: Pm-3m) for all compounds. [Experiment not about SOFC: no annotations here] [PMC5075869]
· La2O3
, SrCO3 and Co powders (all Sigma-Aldrich, 99.995%) were individually dissolved in nitric acid, mixed
inappropriate ratios and citric acid (TraceSELECT, 99.9998%) was added for chelation. [synthesis route: no
annotations here] [PMC6158676]
· The electrolyte support cell used in this study was prepared through a tape casting process, with the outer two
layers having pore formers. [processing: no annotations here] [PMC5075869]

2 PARTICIPANT TYPES
This section describes the high-level entity or concept types that are used to mark the spans in the text referring
to the participants of an experiment. In order to keep the amount of required annotation feasible, but also provide
training data for these types independent of the frame mentions, we decide to mark all mentions of instances of
these types that occur within or in the neighbourhood of sentences actually describing a fuel cell experiment. We use
a loose definition of neighbourhood, including the paragraph or, if paragraph boundaries are unclear, the surrounding
sentences. Annotators are asked to apply their own common sense to define the “relevant neighborhood” for a
sentence.
2.1 MATERIAL
We use the type MATERIAL to annotate text spans referring to materials, elements or substances that are mentioned
as a participant in a fuel cell experiment. (For a list of such participants, see Section 3.) These participants
may be specified by a particular material composition formula (e.g. La0.75Sr0.25Cr0.5Mn0.5O3
) or, at the other end
of the spectrum, just by a mention of the general class of materials such as oxides or hydrocarbons. If a cell
component (e.g., an electrode) is composed of multiple materials, we annotate all of them, if possible as a single
span. References to previous mentions of the material as in material, this, new anode etc. can also be annotated as
spans of type MATERIAL. (In this case, if the mention is not informative on its own, a coreference link should be
added as described in Section 4.2.) Adjectives relative to the material are included in the annotation only if they are
necessary to distinguish between different materials that may have the same composition.
Examples
In the following examples, all underlined spans are marked as MATERIAL.
· Gadolinium-doped ceria (GDC) has been considered as a promising electrolyte material due to its excellent
oxygen ion conductivity at low temperatures. [PMC3564701]
· A low temperature active cathode (like LaSrCoFe-oxide or SmSrCo-oxide) can be used, together with an interlayer
against diffusion or reaction for long term stability. [PMC4021905]
· They run not only on hydrogen, but also on widely available hydrocarbon fuels. [PMC4222441]
· The cells consisted of Ni-YSZ functional anode, YSZ electrolyte and (La0.8Sr0.2)0.95MnO3-δ (LSM)-YSZ cathode
prepared in sequence on the substrate by dip-coating and sintering. [PMC4313086]
· The cell stacks composed of Ce0.9Gd0.1O1.95 porous electrolyte and La1−xSrxMnO3 (x = 0.15, and 0.5)
composite electrode were investigated by Werchmeister et al. [80]. [PMC3730159]
2.2 VALUE
We annotate numerical values and their respective units with the type VALUE. As illustrated by the examples below,
we include both the numbers and the units in the annotation span. In addition, we include comparative specifiers like
more than, between etc.
Examples
In the following example, all underlined spans are marked as VALUE.
· The single-phase SP parent material Ba0.5Sr0.5(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ itself is an MIEC and effective SOFC cathode
that displays a range of ASR values from 0.03 to 10 Ω·cm2 at 650 °C. [PMC3793895]
2.3 DEVICE
The type DEVICE is used to mark mentions of the device used in the fuel cell experiment. We do not include any
modifiers such as adjectives in the annotation span.1
Examples
· The corresponding SOFC with Pt/SmNiO3/Pt geometry demonstrated dramatic power output of 225 mW cm-2 at
500°C. [PMC5793538]

3 EXPERIMENT PARTICIPANTS (RELATIONS)
The relations explained in this section are used to indicate the participants of an experiment frame. In order to group
the various materials, values etc. into experiments, we connect them to the word in the text that indicates that an
experiment was conducted, i.e., the frame-evoking element. All of these relations have their starting point at the
frame-evoking element and their end point at the respective participant.
An experiment participant should always be connected to the closest frame-evoking element, which should be
located in the same sentence and preferably in the same clause of the participant. If the information about the
participants of an experiment is spread over multiple sentences, please connect the participant mention to the
closest experiment-evoking verb and then group these verbs by connecting the frame-evoking elements with
same_experiment.
3.1 anode_material
This relation is used to mark connections between the frame-evoking element and the material that makes up the
anode.
As a convention, we will always annotate the fuel electrode as anode material (even in case of electrolytic cells).
We annotate as anode materials also the ion conductive material in a composite anode even if the electrolyte is
made of the same material. For example, if there are two materials present in the anode, we annotate them both as
anode_material, even if one of them is also the electrolyte material.
See 6.3 for more information about anodes in solid oxide fuel cells.
3.2 cathode_material
This relation is used to connect the frame-evoking element and the material that makes up the cathode.
As a convention, we will always annotate the oxygen electrode as a cathode material (even in case of electrolytic
cells). We annotate as cathode materials also the ion conductive material in a composite cathode even if the
electrolyte is made of the same material. For example, if there are two materials present in the cathode, we annotate
them both as cathode_material, even if one of them is also the electrolyte material.
See Section 6.2 for more information about cathodes in solid oxide fuel cells.
3.3 electrolyte_material
This relation connects the frame-evoking element and the material that makes up the electrolyte.
Electrolytes are briefly discussed in section 6.4
3.4 support_material
This relation connects the frame-evoking element and the material that makes up the support of the cell.
For more information, see Section 6.7.
3.5 interlayer_material
This relation connects the frame-evoking element with a material used as interlayer or buffer layer in a SOFC.
3.6 fuel_used
This relation connects the frame-evoking element and the chemical composition or the class of a fuel or the oxidant
species (indicated as a material).
3.7 device
This relation is used to connect the frame-evoking element and the device tested in this experiment.
3.8 degradation_rate
This relation connects the frame-evoking element with the degradation rate of the cell, which can be also expressed
as a percentage.
3.9 power_density
This relation connects the frame-evoking element with the values of the (maximum/peak) power density obtained
from a device.
3.10 resistance
This relation connects the frame-evoking element to the mention of the electrical resistance of a cell or cell component.
In SOFC experiments, the resistance is usually expressed in area specific units: Ω cm2
. Ohmic resistance and
polarization resistance can be distinguished via the corresponding entries in the knowledge base.
3.11 conductivity
This relation connects the frame-evoking element to the mention of the electrical conductivity of a certain cell or cell
component. Electronic and ionic conductivites can be distinguished via the corresponding entries in the knowledge
base.
3.12 open_circuit_voltage
This relation connects the frame-evoking element and the value of the open circuit voltage (OCV) obtained from a
device.
3.13 working_temperature
This relation connects the frame-evoking element with the value of the temperature at which the cell is operated or at
which a certain experiment has been performed. If the temperature is expressed as a range (e.g., “between 700 and
800 ◦C”), this VALUE is marked as a single span. If a sentence mentions several experiments with differing temperatures, but only one frame-evoking element can be identified, simply link all temperature values to this element. For
example: “It can be seen[EXPERIMENT ] that the electrode polarization resistances in air are 0.027 Ωcm2, 0.11 Ωcm2, and 0.88 Ωcm2 at 800 ◦C[working_temperature], 700 ◦C[working_temperature] and 600 ◦C[working_temperature],
respectively.” [PMC4673446] Note that in this case, each of the values is annotated as a separate link as they do not
correspond to a range of values but to different experiments.
3.14 time_of_operation
This relation connects the frame-evoking element with the value of the duration of an experiment. The duration of an
experiment can be expressed in hours or as a number of RedOx cycles.
3.15 voltage
This relation connects the frame-evoking element with the value of the voltage at which a cell was operated. Not to
be confused with open_circuit_voltage (see Section 3.12).
3.16 current_density
This relation connects the frame-evoking element with the value of the current density of that experimental setup.

4 ADDITIONAL ANNOTATIONS
We here describe several relations that are not part of the Experiment frame.
4.1 same_experiment and experiment_variation
The relations described in Section 3 all assume that the frame-evoking elements occurs in the same sentence as the
participants of the frame. Very often, however, the description of an experiment is spread over several sentences.
Annotators are then asked to link the frame participants to the closest frame-evoking element, which usually is in the
same sentence. The relations explained here are used to connect several frame-evoking elements that describe the
exact same experiment or variations of the experimental settings explained above. While at times it may be difficult
to differentiate them, we distinguish the following two cases:
· same_experiment: This relation connects words introducing a fuel cell experiment with a following frame-evoking
element indicating more experimental information on the same cell with the same experimental conditions. Sometimes the frame-evoking elements of this kind have a meaning of further or deeper investigation or explanation,
e.g. can be seen, exhibit etc.
· experiment_variation: This relation connects a frame-evoking element with another frame-evoking element
indicating an experiment on the same cell, but with further specifications or slightly different operating conditions. It
can also relate two frame-evoking elements that refer to two measurements performed on different materials/cells,
but at the same experimental conditions. Often the frame evoking elements of a subexperiment convey an idea of
comparison, e.g., increase or reach.
In the above example, same_experiment was used to connect the experiment descriptions if the participants, i.e.,
the experimental settings and measurements, should be grouped together. Another example is given in Section 4.2.
4.2 coreference
This relation connects the mention of a frame participant with an earlier mention of the same entity. We do not aim at
a comprehensive coreference annotation, but use this only if the mention of a frame participant is uninformative, e.g.,
if pronouns or abbreviations are used. In this case, we link it to an earlier informative mention. (This procedure will
not allow us to evaluate coreference in the domain of materials science, but using these annotations, we can simulate
a setting where perfect coreference information would be available for frame participants in our experiments.)
4.3 thickness
This relation can be used to give further information on a material used for composing cell. It relates the MATERIAL
mention with the mention of the VALUE expressing the material’s thickness.






