The Materials Science Procedural Text Corpus: Annotating Materials Synthesis Procedures with Shallow Semantic Structures

2.2 Structures Annotated
An annotated graph consists of nodes denoting the
participants of synthesis steps and edges denoting
relationships between the participants in the synthesis. Operation nodes define the main structure
of the graph and the arguments for each operation
include different materials, conditions and apparatus. For annotating the text describing a synthesis
procedure, we define a set of span-level labels that
identify the operations and typed arguments in the
text, i.e. the nodes of the graph. We also define a
set of relationships between text spans, which label
the edges of the synthesis graph. We detail these
two kinds of labels next.
Span-level Labels: Each span is a sequence of
tokens or characters which form one entity mention (for example. “quartz tube furnace”). Entity
mentions are associated with entity types which
specify a category/kind for the entity mention. Our
dataset defines a total of 21 entity types, with the
least frequent entity type occuring 32 times. The 10
most frequent entity types defined for our dataset
are listed in Table 1a. We describe a notable subset
of the entity types in more detail below alongside
examples of their occurrence in text. In examples,
the text underlined is the span to be annotated.
Material: Materials that are used in the synthesis of the target. For example: Cr2O3
,
Strontium carbonate, BaTiO3
, Li2CO3
, Water,
Ethanol.
Nonrecipe-Material: Chemically specified
materials that are not used in the synthesis of
the synthesis target. For example: “BaTiO3
powder (Ba/Ti=0.999)”, “Li2CO3 was used as
the Li source”, “Si/Al ratio was 5”.
Operation: Discrete actions physically performed by the researcher or discrete process
steps taken to synthesize the target.
Material-Descriptor: Describes a material’s structure, shape, form, type, role, etc.
and must be directly or nearly adjacent to
the material it describes. Does not include
amounts, concentrations, or purities of materials. For example: CaCu3Ti4O12 compound,
Copper ion, GaAs nanowires, Anatase TiO2
,
Deionized water.
Meta: A canonical name to specify a particular overall synthesis method used
for synthesis. For example: “Graphite
oxide was prepared by oxidation of
graphite powder according to the modified
Hummers’ method”. “Bi2S3 nanorods with
orthorhombic structure were prepared through
the hydrothermal method”. “Graphene oxide
(GO) was prepared from graphite powder by
the Staudenmaier method.”
Amount-Unit: These describe absolute
amounts, concentrations, purities, ratios, flow
rates and so on. For example: mg, mL, M, %.
Condition-Unit: These describe the units of
measurement for intangible conditions under
which operations are performed. For ex: °C,
K, sec, RPM, mW.
Condition-Misc: Qualitative descriptions of
conditions. For example: Room temperature,
Dropwise, Naturally, Vacuum.
Synthesis-Apparatus: Equipment used to
perform an operation involved in the synthesis.
Characterization-Apparatus: Equipment used to characterize a materials prop-
erties.
Relation Labels: We define a set of relationships between entity mentions, which label the
edges of the synthesis graph. A subset of these
relations describe direct relationships between operations and their arguments, others describe relationships between argument mentions, and the
Next-Operation relation describes relationships between operations so as to step towards annotating
full recipe graphs. The different relation labels we
define are tabulated in Table 1b, a subset of these
are defined below:
Recipe-target: Indicates a material assigned to an
operation which is the target of the synthesis
procedure.
Participant-material: A material that is part of a
particular synthesis step.
Recipe-precursor: Indicates a material which is
the source of an element for the target material
used in a specific synthesis operation.
Apparatus-of : Denotes an apparatus to be used in
a synthesis operation.
Condition-of : Denotes a reaction condition for a
synthesis operation.
Coref-of : Intended to capture coreferent mentions
of entities presented by abbreviations, text in
parenthesis and so on. For example: “Air
(O2
/N2 mixture gases)” and “He were supplied to the porous support side . . . ”. “Air” is
coreferent with O2
and N2
.
Amount-of : Links a number entity to the corresponding unit of measurement.
Next-operation: A relation intended to denote the
true synthesis order of the synthesis steps; the
relation is also intended to implicitly denote
the flow of intermediate materials in the synthesis. However, in this first release of the
data, as a placeholder for future annotations,
Next-Operation is used simply used to indicate the next operation in text order rather than
in true synthesis order.
We refer readers to our annotation guidelines for
definitions of the complete set of entity type and
relation labels in the dataset.

2.4 Annotation Decisions
Next we highlight specific points of contention in
creating the current set of annotations.
What constitutes an operation?: While our
definition of the Operation entity type specifies only actions performed by a lab researcher to
be valid operations, there are cases where our annotations diverge from this definition. This happens
in the following cases:
• Cases where an operation isn’t explicitly performed by the researcher. For example: “After
this, the autoclave was cooled to room temperature naturally”.
• Cases with nested verb structures. For
example: “white precipitate which was
harvested by centrifugation . . . ”.
In the current set of annotations, we allow experts
to decide when a particular candidate operation
should be considered valid and when it can be
omitted. As our inter-annotator agreements will
demonstrate, experts tend to agree often on what
should be considered an operation. The question
of what constitutes an operation is analogous to the
notion of what constitutes an “event” in the broader
NLP literature as highlighted by Mostafazadeh et al.
(2016).

Argument state and argument re-use: Annotation of semantic structures often allow for argument spans to have multiple parents (Surdeanu
et al., 2008; Banarescu et al., 2013; Oepen et al.,
2015). For example in Figure 2, the material “Cu”
could be considered an argument of the operations
“placed” and “heated”. Allowing for arguments
to have multiple parents however runs into complications when the operation causes the state of
a material to change (incidentally, this is not the
case in the example we highlight above). When a
materials state changes due to a specific operation,
considering the same text span to be the argument
of a different operation would not be chemically
valid. For example, in the sentence:
After that, the mixed solution was aged
at 60 degC for 48 h, followed by heating
at 900 degC for 2 h with a heating rate
of 5 degC min-1 in an N2 atmosphere.
“solution” is labeled as Participant-material for
“aged”, but it isnt considered a Participant-material
to “heating” since aging caused it to be a different
material. Similarly, in:
1.6632 g lithium acetate was dissolved
into 26 mL of ethanol-water mixture
(12:1 in volume) and slowly dropped into
the above suspension.
“lithium acetate” is only labeled as Participantmaterial for “dissolved” and not for “dropped”
whose sole argument is “suspension”. This clearly
highlights an instance of a material entirely absent
from the text being the true argument of an operation. Therefore the current set of annotations
does not allow for arguments to have multiple parents. Further, the tracking of state itself is also
complicated by the difficulty in being able to write
down precise states at a meaningful level of granularity for all possible materials, this is further
complicated by the ambiguity presented by underspecified materials in synthesis text, for example in
the sentence:
With the indraught of ozone,
black solid appeared gradually and the
clear solution turned into black slurry
finally.
Most of the entities, “black solid”, “clear solution”
and “black slurry” are chemically under-specified,
with precise specification even unnecessary for describing the synthesis procedure.
Relations across sentences: Often, in synthesis procedures, a given synthesis step is described
across multiple sentences. In these cases it would
be meaningful to allow for relationships between
operation-argument entities which are in different
sentences. For the sake of simplicity and to stick
more closely to a sentence level shallow semantic
annotation, our current iteration of the annotations
has avoided this annotation, however a very small
number of instances of cross-sentence relations do
exist (< 1% of all relations in the dataset). Examples of this type are as follows:
First, sulfuric acid and nitric acid were
mixed well by stirring 15 min in an
ice bath, and then graphite powder was
dispersed into the solution. After 15 min,
potassium chlorate was added into the
system - very slowly to prevent strong
reaction during the oxidation process.
Oxygen with 20 sccm flow rate and argon
with 40 sccm flow rate were used as the
sputtering gas. Growth temperature was
400 degC and the RF power was 90 W.
Here “min” and “dispersed” are related by a Condition Of relation. Similarly, “degC” and “W”,
both are annotated with Condition Of relations to
“used”. Annotations of this kind were created when
annotators deemed such an annotation absolutely
necessary. Synthesis procedures which required annotation primarily of cross-sentence relations were
ignored.

2.5 Inter-annotator Agreement
Next we report a host of inter-annotator agreements
for the different levels of semantic annotation in
our dataset. The agreements we report are based on
a collection of 5 synthesis procedures which were
annotated separately by all three expert annotators.
All the numbers we report are Fleiss’ Kappa scores
for the 3 expert annotators.
Span-level Labels: Agreements on span level
labels correspond to the agreement on entity type
labels assigned to individual tokens. We observe the overall agreement on the token level
labels to be 0.861. A break down of this agreement by the entity type is presented in Table
3a. As this indicates, there seems to be high
agreement on labels which have clear definitions; namely. Number, Amount-Unit. Labels which by definition are a lot more ambiguous, however, have a lower agreement. The
two entity types Material-Descriptor and
Nonrecipe-Material see the lowest agreements. We believe these to be inherently
more subjective entity types. In the case of
Material-Descriptor it is often that some
annotators may consider the descriptor and the adjacent material to be Material in its own right,
for example: “Deionized Water” may be considered as a material in its own right or ”deionized”
may be considered to be a descriptor. In the case
of Nonrecipe-Material, a similarly harder
decision needs to be made by the annotator, since
these are materials which aren’t involved in the
synthesis but are still mentioned in the text for
completeness information. Often it is up to the
interpretation of the annotator to decide whether a
material is indeed involved in the synthesis leading
to the low agreement on this entity type.
Relation Labels: Agreement on relation labels
were computed for the set of cases where a pair of
annotators agreed on the token level annotations,
this happens 66% of the time in our repeated annotations. For a pair of entities, if both annotators
indicate the same relation type the annotators are
considered to be in agreement. For relation labels
we observe a agreement score of 0.941. Since we
only consider cases where the token labels are in
agreement, we believe that it is likely that when annotators agree on the token level annotations they
also tend to agree on the relation level labels.