Looking through glass: Knowledge discovery from materials science literature using natural language processing

SUMMARY
Most of the knowledge in materials science literature is in the form of unstructured data such as text and images. Here, we present a framework employing natural language processing, which automates text and image comprehension and precision knowledge extraction from inorganic glasses’ literature. The abstracts are
automatically categorized using latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) to classify and search semantically linked
publications. Similarly, a comprehensive summary of images and plots is presented using the caption cluster
plot (CCP), providing direct access to images buried in the papers. Finally, we combine the LDA and CCP with
chemical elements to present an elemental map, a topical and image-wise distribution of elements occurring
in the literature. Overall, the framework presented here can be a generic and powerful tool to extract and
disseminate material-specific information on composition–structure–processing–property dataspaces,
allowing insights into fundamental problems relevant to the materials science community and accelerated
materials discovery.


To demonstrate the proposed approach, we downloaded more
than 600,000 research articles, full texts, and images related to
the keyword ‘‘oxide glasses’’ and ‘‘materials science’’ using
the CrossRef metadata query API45 and the Elsevier Science
Direct API.46 Following this, supervised learning was performed
on the abstracts of the manuscripts to filter them (see Methods
for details). Abstracts are the most information-dense organ of
a scientific paper, containing information on the material under
study, property being explored, and characterization/synthesis
methods being used in service of the investigation. As such,
they are unlikely to contain spurious information or refer to materials or properties not mentioned in the text. This specificity
makes an abstract the most useful part of a text, and it is therefore not surprising that many NLP studies on materials have only
aken paper abstracts as the input.7 Based on the supervised
learning, approximately 100,000 research articles were classified as relevant to the topic ‘‘glass,’’ with precision, accuracy,
and recall of 92%, 86%, and 67%, respectively, on the test
set. Note that the model with the highest recall was selected to
include as many glass-related articles as possible. Although
not an exhaustive list, the total number of articles downloaded
are in the same range as the number of texts identified in other
comprehensive literature surveys on glass.