MatSciRE: Leveraging Pointer Networks to Automate Entity and Relation Extraction for Material Science Knowledge-base Construction

Abstract
Material science literature is a rich source of factual information about various categories of entities (like materials and compositions)
and various relations between these entities, such as conductivity, voltage, etc. Automatically extracting this information to generate
a material science knowledge base is a challenging task. In this paper, we propose MatSciRE (Material Science Relation Extractor), a
Pointer Network-based encoder-decoder framework, to jointly extract entities and relations from material science articles as a triplet
(entity1,relation, entity2). Specifically, we target the battery materials and identify five relations to work on - conductivity, coulombic
efficiency, capacity, voltage, and energy. Our proposed approach achieved a much better F1-score (0.771) than a previous attempt
using ChemDataExtractor (0.716). The overall graphical framework of MatSciRE is shown in Fig 1. The material information is
extracted from material science literature in the form of entity-relation triplets using MatSciRE.


3.6. Ground Truth Dataset Annotation
To verify the correctness of the distant supervision based
dataset generation and our joint relation-entity extraction model,
we randomly select 114 papers from the set of 3,812 papers and
provide them (using tool [53]) to two different material science
knowledge experts along with a good working proficiency in
English to manually identify the triplets with the five relations
(Conductivity, Coulombic Efficiency, Capacity, Voltage, and
Energy). The total number of sentences annotated by the experts
for these articles is 1,255. We select three annotators after
several discussions and conditions of fulfilling many criterias
like annotators should have domain knowledge expertise along
with a good working proficiency in English. Annotators are
experienced in similar tasks earlier also (with earlier publications
and datasets are public) so the annotators are reliable in these
annotation tasks. Initial labeling is done by two annotators and
any annotation discrepancy is checked and resolved by the third
annotator after discussing with two others. So, the final judgment
is based on three annotators’ discussion. One common conflict
arises regarding the inclusion of the material name. For example,
in the following sentence -“Tin phosphide ( Sn4P3 ) has been
a promising anode material for SIBs owing to its theoretical
capacity of 1132 mA h g 1 and high electrical conductivity of
30.7 S cm 1 " - One annotation contains "Tin phosphide ( Sn4P3
)" and another contains only "Sn4P3". Finally, "Tin Phosphide"
is not included. The inter-annotator agreement Cohen κ between
two annotators is 0.82 including these types of conflicts - which
is almost perfect κ score as described in Landis and Koch [54].
The statistics of the five relations are shown below, which exhibit
a count of different relations among entity pairs.
• Conductivity: 122
• Coulombic Efficiency: 553
• Capacity: 378
• Voltage: 637
• Energy: 103