ULSA: unified language of synthesis actions for the representation of inorganic synthesis protocols

Applying AI power to predict syntheses of novel materials requires high-quality, large-scale datasets.
Extraction of synthesis information from scientific publications is still challenging, especially for
extracting synthesis actions, because of the lack of a comprehensive labeled dataset using a solid,
robust, and well-established ontology for describing synthesis procedures. In this work, we propose the
first unified language of synthesis actions (ULSA) for describing inorganic synthesis procedures. We
created a dataset of 3040 synthesis procedures annotated by domain experts according to the proposed
ULSA scheme. To demonstrate the capabilities of ULSA, we built a neural network-based model to map
arbitrary inorganic synthesis paragraphs into ULSA and used it to construct synthesis flowcharts for
synthesis procedures. Analysis of the flowcharts showed that (a) ULSA covers essential vocabulary used
by researchers when describing synthesis procedures and (b) it can capture important features of
synthesis protocols. The present work focuses on the synthesis protocols for solid-state, sol–gel, and
solution-based inorganic synthesis, but the language could be extended in the future to include other
synthesis methods. This work is an important step towards creating a synthesis ontology and a solid
foundation for autonomous robotic synthesis.

 Unied language of synthesis actions and annotation
scheme
To unify terminology used to describe a synthesis procedure, we
dened 8 action terms that unambiguously identify a type of
synthesis action. Every action word (or multi-word phrase) in
the dataset is mapped to the corresponding action term
according to the following rule: the word (or multi-word phrase)
is recognized as an action if it (a) results in modication of the
state of the material or mixture during the synthesis or (b)
carries a piece of information affecting the outcome of the
synthesis procedure. The action terms used within the unied
language are explained below. In each example, the text
underlined is the word or phrase that is annotated.
 Starting: a word or a multi-word phrase that marks the
beginning of a synthesis procedure. Specically, this oen
indicates which materials will be produced. For example: “PMNPT was synthesized by the columbite precursor method”, “solidstate synthesis was used to prepare the target material”, “the
powder was obtained aer the aforementioned procedure”.
 Mixing: a word or a multi-word phrase that marks the
combination of different materials (in a solid or liquid phase) to
form one substance or mass. For example: “precursors were
weighted and ball-milled”, “precursors were mixed in appropriate amounts”, “Sb2O3 is added to the solution”, “the solution
was neutralized”, “the mixture was stabilized by the addition of
sodium citrate”.
 Purication: a word or a multi-word phrase that marks the
separation of the sample phases. This also includes drying of
a material. For example: “samples were exfoliated from
substrates”, “the liquid was discarded and the remaining
product was ltered off and washed several times with distilled
water”, “the precursors were heated in order to remove the
moisture”, “the precipitate was collected by washing the solution in distilled water”.
 Heating: a word or a multi-word phrase that marks
increasing or maintaining high temperature for the purpose of
obtaining a specic sample phase or promoting a reaction
rather than drying a sample. For example: “the powder sample
was annealed to obtain a crystalline phase”, “the mixture was
subjected to heating at 240 C for 24 h”.
 Cooling: a word or a multi-word phrase that marks rapid,
regular, or slow cooling of a sample. For example: “the product
was cooled down to room temperature in the furnace”, “the
sample was quenched rapidly in the solid CO2”, “the product
was le to cool down to room temperature”.
 Shaping: a word or a multi-word phrase that marks the
compression of powder or forming the sample to a specic
shape. For example: “the powder was pressed into circular
pellets”, “the powder was then pelletized with a uniaxial press”.
 Reaction: a word or a multi-word phrase that marks
a transformation without any external action. For example: “the
sample was le to react for 6 h”, “the temperature was kept at
1000 K”, “the solution was maintained at 200 K for 12 h”.
 Non-Altering: a word or a multi-word phrase that marks an
action done on a sample that either does not induce any
transformation of the sample or does not belong to any of the
above classes. “The pellets were placed in a sealed alumina
crucible”, “the reaction vessel was wrapped with aluminum
foil”, “the sample was sealed in a tube”, “the gel was transferred
to an oven”.